---
layout: post
title:  "Motion Mirroring Robotic Arm"
categories: [ C, Mechatronics, Embedded Systems, I2C ]
image: assets/images/imugrip.gif
featured: true
hidden: true
---
C, Mechatronics, Embedded Systems, I2C

## Overview
As part of Northwestern’s microprocessor design course, my group and I created an Electromyography
(EMG) controlled robotic manipulator. This allows a user to connect an EMG sensor to their arm to
open and close a robotic gripper by simply opening and closing their hand. We also combined project with 
another group in the class who were controlling a 2 DOF robotic arm's motion based off of IMU data.
By combining these projects, we were able to create a system that would move a robot arm and control 
the gripper based off of the user's motion. 


## EMG Gripper

<div align="center"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6Y9bxQ33sTY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

This project was developed around the Microbit V2. Code is typically written to the Microbit in Python,
however, we were writing directly to the Microbit's microcontroller (nRF52833) in C. The end-effector
itself is a mechanical gripper that opens and closes based off of the position of a connected servo.
We controlled this servo with a PCA9685 servo driver over I2C. Additionally, we used two sensors
in this project: an EMG sensor and a force sensitive resistor (FSR). The EMG sensor measures electrical 
signals in muscles that are generated from movement. This is attached to the users arm with electrodes
and used to detect if the hand is closed or not. The FSR measures the amount of
force that is applied to it. This is placed on the inside of the gripper and used to detect if the 
gripper is actively gripping something.

The basic operation of this system is that the output of the two sensors are constantly being read
by the Microbit. If the EMG sensor gives a high signal, then the user is trying to grasp. When this
is detected, PWM signals are sent to the servo driver over I2C in a loop, closing the gripper incrementally
with each iteration. When an item is grasped, a forced is applied to the FSR, producing a 
high signal that is used to break the grasping loop and hold the gripper at a constant position.
Once, the user releases their grasp, the gripper will then start to incrementally open, unless
interrupted by another grasp command. 


<div align="center"><h2> <a href="https://github.com/oubrejames/emgripper">View EMG Gripper Github</a></h2></div>


## EMG Gripper + IMU Arm

<div align="center"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xjytBSXibu4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

When the EMG gripper is combined with the IMU controlled arm, the resulting system allows a user to
manipulate the robot to perform various actions just by moving their own arm and hand. 

## The Team
#### EMG Gripper
* David Dorf
* Katie Hughes
* James Oubre

#### IMU Arm
* Nicolas Morales 
* Hang Yin 
* Felipe Jannarone
